---
title: Overview
date: 2021-10-13
slug: btc-overview
---

Bitcoin is a public digital currency system that runs on top of the internet over a Peer-to-Peer (P2P) network where all peers (i.e. nodes) are connected to each other through several inbound and outbound connections. Users can make payments by creating transactions that transfer bitcoins (BTCs) to other users. To send and receive transactions, users rely on cryptographic private/public key pairs generated from elliptic curves. Public keys are hashed to form anonymous addresses to send funds at and private keys serve for users authentication when they redeem BTCs. 

Once issued, transactions are broadcast to the network and validated by other connected peers through a set of verification rules. Valid transactions are added to a waiting list, called the memory pool (i.e. mempool), in order to be included in a block. Some nodes, called miners, pick transactions from the mempool and bundle them together into blocks that can contain several hundreds of transactions. To build a valid block, miners have to resolve a cryptographic puzzle, that is the proof-of-work (PoW), to prove that they have spent enough computational resources in the process. This is a fundamental of Bitcoin’s security as it ensures the decentralization of the system. Blocks that fulfill the PoW are broadcast to the network and verified by other nodes in the same manner as transactions. Each node adds the newly received valid blocks on top of a blockchain that they locally hold and that contains all previous valid blocks and transactions. Blocks and transactions are cryptographically linked to one another so the integrity of the blockchain data is secured using hash functions and digital signatures.

By consensus, the longest chain in the network is considered to be the authoritative one: the main public blockchain. Because each block in the chain is linked to the previous one, the main blockchain is also the one that carries the most proof-of-work, that is the one that spent the most computational power. Once a block is added to the main chain, the transactions it contains are said to be confirmed, and each further block added on top adds a new confirmation for the same transactions. Bitcoin considers a transaction to be permanently settled after it receives six confirmations, at which point the probability of alteration is negligible.

 The entire process described above, from transaction creation to block confirmation forms the consensus mechanism that allows Bitcoin to operate securely without the need for a central authority.

As for miners, they are key actors in Bitcoin because they are responsible for the data to be included in the blockchain and their honest behavior is encouraged by economic incentives. Miners can be lone nodes mining (i.e. constructing blocks) for themselves, or they can form mining pools, in which they unite their computational power to solve together the PoW and share the rewards, which brings more stability to their revenue.
